I needed Vampire Crawlers to be worse.
I'm not even joking. I just wanted to
play it, review it, tell you all about
it. Happy days, I can get on with my
life. But it's not going to happen.
Developer Poncle, who created Vampire
Survivors, which released on Steam in
2021, shouldn't be able to just jump
genre and make something that's almost
as compelling as that game. It shouldn't
be possible. And in fact, for the first
10 or 15 minutes, I was actually sighing
relief thinking, "Nah, they haven't
quite got the formula right here." But
um yeah, yeah, I was wrong. Is Vampire
Crawlers about to stoke uh the fires of
addiction? Or is he going to suck the
blood out of your backlog? I mean, those
things could both actually be positives,
couldn't they? Well, my name's Mark
Walker. Welcome back to SwitchUp. Now,
let's find out.
>> go
without a fight.
Gathering the magic.
Interestingly, one of Poncle's key
design philosophies for their games is
an emphasis on simplicity, minimal
controls, emergent combinations and
upgrades, and short, satisfying runs,
which feels like a description of
Vampire Survivors, but equally could be
one for Vampire Crawlers. Just as with
the first game, narrative is left almost
entirely up to your own imagination. Set
within the same dark gothic universe as
Vampire Survivors, you could [music] be
mistaken for thinking this is simply
Vampire Survivors from a first-person
perspective, but it's not. Crawlers, as
the title suggests, references the fact
that this has gone down the dungeon
crawler route, with you taking one of
your crawlers, the heroes which you
control, on a first-person adventure
into the open world map. This consists
of many different areas, but once again
will feel familiar if you've played the
original game, locations such as the
forest or the library, but each level is
split over a number of floors, which can
be seen here. You have to reach the very
end to be rewarded [music] with death. I
mean, literally death will come out and
kill you, just as he did if you reached
the end of the [music] time limit with
Vampire Survivors. I did wonder how they
were going to handle that, but it's nice
to see the old chap make a return, as is
the big level completed that comes up on
screen. Controls, you can pick what you
want, really. Be it a traditional
controller, you can use the Nintendo
Switch's mouse mode, or you can use
touch screen. Initially, controls feel a
little bit unusual. For example, the
right analog stick turns your player,
while the left goes forwards and
backwards and strafes left and right.
The map gives you a good idea of where
you're facing, and in fact, I found
myself often using that as my reference
point if I quickly wanted to move from
one side to the other or reach an object
I'd left intentionally behind. But how
does it actually work? What is the
gameplay? And and how on earth have they
managed to translate the concept of
Vampire Survivors into such a different
gameplay format? Well, it's all
card-based. So, you have a series of
cards, you can look at the ones that are
in your hand, or those that are in the
discard pile, and each of them has a
number. So, if there are zero, you can
use them without any mana cost, a one
takes one, etc., etc. Starting at zero,
though, powers up one. If you then go to
one, that makes number two more
powerful. Having a finite amount of mana
means that you need to on the fly
quickly calculate the best combinations.
>> [music]
>> Sometimes it's good to go with a zero
card up to an offensive one card, back
down to zero, and so on. And you can add
to your mana pool through various means
and certain unlocks.
>> [groaning]
>> This is important because just like
Vampire Survivors, Crawlers does that
thing where it gradually teaches you
unique combinations without ever
explicitly saying. So, you might reach
an area where you can choose an upgrade.
It will say you can evolve two of your
different weapon cards, and these then
become a much more powerful three mana
point card. This might sound confusing,
but it really isn't. The higher the
number, the more points they take, but
usually the more damage. But when you're
also thinking about starting at the
lowest number and working your way up
numerically to game the combo meter into
doing massive attack damage, you soon
get into a real rhythm, and you know
which weapons work best together, which
combinations. And of course, you have
the classics returning, things like
garlic. Now, battles actually work on a
line-based system. So, when you're
facing an enemy, there's actually
several rows of depth. Personally, I
think they could have done a better job
of letting you know where the enemies
are in that lineup, because when they
reach the front row, they'll
automatically attack. This is important
because a lot of your combos can knock
back enemies. If you're about to perform
an offensive move and you hover over a
card, it will show you by the color
shown on the enemy whether or not
they're going to die with that attack.
That's really important strategically.
So, if you wipe that entire front line
out, you know on the next enemy's turn,
they're not going to be able to attack
for at least one move. There is also an
armor system. You can apply armor to
yourself, but it does only last for that
one hand of cards before refreshing. I
mentioned at the start that there was
about 10 or 15 minutes where I thought,
"Nah, they haven't quite got the formula
right." And just like with Survivors,
this uses a meta-progression system that
allows you to permanently upgrade your
characters. There's a shop within a
small hub area or town where you can put
the game's currency into making yourself
stronger, and this makes a real
difference. As does that combo-based
gameplay once you figured it out. The
changes which individual crawlers make
to the gameplay is a little more
nuanced. It may change the offensive
pickups that you get, but it doesn't
feel as immediate as it did in that
title. Another design element that
really helped to very quickly build up
the compulsion [clears throat]
is the amount that you're rewarded even
when you [music] lose. It unlocks new
shop areas, new merchants, such as the
fortune teller, who you can choose a
buff card to take into the [music] next
round. There's the museum, and just a
sense of rapid early progression took me
from a feeling of this game's just
complete random chance to really
calculating what resources I had on a
map, what I was going to leave for later
after a boss fight. And yes, chicken
does make a return. As you make your way
down floor by floor, you'll even
encounter fights where you've got barely
any health left, but through clever use
of things like the armor system, you can
keep yourself alive. I guess what I'm
saying is the RNG factor that feels like
the primary focus at the beginning drops
very quickly to be replaced by more
skill, if not to the same level as
Vampire Survivors. Cards can also be
gemmed, allowing you to modify them
individually at times, and thus stack
effects or double damage, and generally
just build up those combos. This is one
of the best handheld experiences. As you
can see, just pressing stuff on screen,
it's instantly responsive. It just makes
more sense in many ways than a
traditional controller method. Almost a
staple of Poncle games, gameplay
requires perseverance, but it will
reward that very quickly. It is stupidly
addictive, and what I initially mistook
for overly simplistic turned out to just
be tight gameplay design. Some
combinations do feel a little
overpowered, very much steering you in a
certain direction, but there is still
incentive to try out and experiment with
others, especially considering the
amount of unlocks. Gameplay for me, I
think it scores 17 [music]
out of 20. The controls in handheld were
excellent. Mouse mode is nice, and I
believe you can remap the buttons with a
controller. There were a couple of
slight bugs at the moment. One of them
actually affected the controls where I
couldn't move in the direction I wanted.
I know the developers are aware of
these. There were also a couple that had
me locked into a fight, but still,
they've done a good job overall.
Controls score 18 out of 20.
>> [music]
>> Vampire Crawlers runs on a proprietary
engine made by Poncle, I believe, and
shares some of the same tech [music]
with Survivors. With that said, it's a
very different perspective working from
the three-dimensional one, but they've
clearly re-employed many of the same
assets to quite good effect. But this is
not a taxing or particularly beautiful
game, but it still has that very
familiar charm that you'd be used to.
Shifting the attacks to first person,
they work surprisingly well, and you
recognize them as the same moves. The
soundtrack is great.
Lots of returning music, but some new
tracks as well. A few unusual choices,
like the enemy attack sound, but nothing
too egregious. Performance has been
almost flawless on the Switch 2 version,
but I really can't see it struggling on
Switch 1. You can see that here. But as
mentioned, there are a few bugs at the
moment that the developers are working
on. Visuals and performance combined,
they score 16 out of 20. Sound and audio
scores 18 out of 20.
Vampire Crawlers will set you back
£9.99,
and that could be on the Switch 1 or the
Switch 2. Now, the How Long to Beat says
4 hours. I don't think that's true at
all. I spent more than 4 hours just
marking about on the first couple of
stages and certainly a completionist run
[music] I think would take around 20 to
25 hours. For a tenner, you can't really
ask for much more. It's just whether or
not that core gameplay clicks with you.
I give value 19 out of 20.
>> [music]
>> Vampire Crawlers the Turbo Wild Card
from Vampire Survivors, as is the full
title that I've refused to say up until
this point, is a large departure from
Poncle's first title but surprised me
with its own success. If you're not a
fan of this genre or you think you're
not, I would urge you to give this one a
go. Stick with it for about an hour and
well, just say goodbye to the outside
world really. It gets a Switch Up score
of 88%.
So there we have it. Thanks to all of
you that enjoy the content. Let me know,
have you been playing this one anyway?
I'm sure you probably wanted us to
review this one, a lot of you. I'd seen
a lot of comments and I'm glad we got
round to it even if we're a little bit
late. Thank you to our Patreons, our
members and as always for all things
Switch, all the time, keep [music] it
Switch Up. Cheers guys. See ya.
>> [music]